### Networking
- **Networking refers to inter conection divices that cahn share /cominicate each other known as ***Networking*** **
#### client and server
- **Client** is adivice or acomputer that give requset for server to get response
- **server** is apower full computer that is used to give response for requester
#### Classfication of networ there are two 
- There are two class of network this are **Geographical network and** and **Classification by component roles**.
- 1) ### Geographically
- Geo graphically means we classify using topography or area place this are.
- ***LAN local are network for locally like house to bed room with one house.**
- ***MAN (Metroplitan network) is we use for one town or city like Govermental bulding.**
- ***Gevermental bank and othe most far bldings**
- ***WAN (wide are network) is usally most expansive and it can conect continet to continet using optifiber cable like ,internate,**
- 2) ### By componet role
- #### Peer-to-peer
-  In a peer-to-peer network, all computers are considered equal. 
- all computer can gain equally accsess
- #### Server based
- A server-based network offers **centralized control**
- and is designed for secure operations.
- ### Client-based
-  Client-based network servers process requests from  clients and return just the results
- it is alient but can act as server
## IP(Internet protocole)
- ip used to classify which machine or computer defined
- it is unique identifire of machine/device
- it generated by either automatically or manually
- **Automatically** is when conecting with wifi it can get automatic ip in *DHCP* protocole
- manually the user can give ip or manifucture campany
#### Classfication of ip based on verssion
- This are **IPV4**(internet protocole version 4) and **IPV6**(Internet protocole verssion 6)
- ## 1 IPV4
-  An IPv4 address is a 32-bit sequence of 1s and 0s.
-  To make the IP address easier to use, the address is  usually written as four decimal numbers separated by  periods. 
-  This way of writing the address is called the dotted decimal format.
- *** IP generated by DHCP or Manuall**
- IP addresses consist of four sections like ***192.10.200.10**
- ***Each section is 8 bits long**
- **Every IP address has two parts:**
- **Network: to identify the network( *የእናንተ,የጎረቤት*)** and **Host: identify the user(*ስልክ,PC*)**
- ### Private and Public IP addresses.
- is an ip address that is given to the host on the WAN network
- ### Private IP:
- is ip that is given to the host on LAN network it can acsse locally Like (**Intranet**)
- **Intranet** is a type of privet ip that only acsse specifc  are host given by LAN
## Class of IPV4
- ### CLASS A
- Have 24 bit of space for HOSTS  1 octate 1-127 
- it have  it have 1 Network part 126.12.28.20 
- it have 24 bite all and host it have 3 host octate
- ### CLASS B
- Have 2 Network part
- Have 16bit of space for HOSTS 128-191 and 
- have 16 bit of network
- ### CLASS C
- have 3 network part each 
- it have 24 bit space of network and it range 192-223
- it have 1 host bit and have 8 bit of host
- ## Reserved IP Addresses
- Certain host addresses are reserved and cannot be assigned to devices on a network. 
- **a. Addresses beginning #127 are reserved for loopback and internal testing**
- **b. An IP address that has binary #0s in all host bit positions is reserved for the network address.**
- **c. An IP address that has binary #1 or 255s in all host bit positions is reserved for the broadcast addres**
### Example
- Examples of Reserved addresses
-  0.0.0.0 #Networkadress
-  127.0.0.0#Forlopback
-  128.0.0.0
-  191.255.0.0
-  223.255.255.#boradcast
-  192.0.0.0
- ## IPv6 ( Internet Protocol Version 6)
-  IPv6 is a 128-bit alphanumeric long value.
- That identifies an endpoint devices in IPv6 network.
-  Format of an IPv6 address: FE80:CD00:0000:0CDE:1257:0000:211E:729C
1) ALPHANumeric
2) Separated by colon(:)
3) IP generated automatically.
- The main difference is the IP-space(host holding).
- IPv4 holds 32-bit ip address but IPv6 holds 128-bit  ip Addresses.
#### To know your computer ip address On windows:
1) Opean CMD
1) Run this code `ipconfig` then you can get your computer ip
#### To know your computer ip address On Linux:
1) Opean your terminal
2) Run this code `ifconfig`
## MAC(Media Access Control) Address
- It is Given by A manufacturer of that  network adapter.
-  Network adapter is a hardware device.
- It helps us to have connection ( our wifi adapter or our ethernet port)
- It is Alphanumeric, with 2 part
- It Organizational Unique Id
- It  Universally Administered Address
### MAC(Media Access Control) Address
-  Flat name space of 48 bits
-  Typically written in six octets in hex
-  E.g., 00-15-C5-49-04-A9 for my Ethernet Organizationally unique identifier
-  Assigned by IEEE Registration Authority
-  Determines the first 24 bits of the address
-  E.g., 00-15-C5 corresponds to “Dell Inc”
-  Remainder of the MAC address
-  Allocated by the manufacturer
-  E.g., 49-04-A9 for my Ethernet card
- ### OSI(Open Systems Interconnection) Reference  model
-  OSI Reference Model - internationally standardised  network architecture.
-  Specified in ISO 7498.
-  It is an idea model to show the way of network work
-  Model has 7 layers.
-  It shows How Data transfers between 2 hosts/servers
## Layers 1-4 relate to communications technology.
- Layers 5-7 relate to user applications.
-  The sequence differ when  sender and receiver use it
### Layer 7: Application Layer
- Level at which applications access network services.
- Represents services that directly support software applications for file transfers,
-  database  access, and electronic mail, BROWSERS etc.
-  Your data is DATA
-  PROTOCOLS: HTTP,FTP,SMTP

### Layer 6: Presentation Layer
-  Related to representation of transmitted data
-  Translates different data representations from the  Application layer into uniform standard format
-  Providing services for secure efficient data transmission
-  e.g. data encryption, and data compression.
-  Your data is DATA
-  PROTOCOLS: SSL

### Layer 5: Session Layer
-  Allows two applications on different computers to  establish, use, and end a session. 
-  e.g. file transfer, remote login 
-  Establishes dialog control
-  Regulates which side transmits, plus when and how  long it transmits.
-  Performs token management and synchronization.
-  Your data is DATA
-  PROTOCOLS: RPC,NETBIOS

### Layer 4: Transport Layer
-  **Manages transmission packets**
-  Repackages long messages when necessary into small packets for transmission **[ sender ]**
-  Reassembles packets in correct order to get the original message. [ receiver ]
-  Handles error recognition and recovery. 
-  Transport layer at receiving acknowledges packet delivery. 
-  Resends missing packets
- **Your data is SEGMENTS**
-  PROTOCOLS: TCP,UDP

### Layer 3: Network Layer
-  Manages addressing/routing of data within the ip range
-  Addresses messages and translates logical addresses and names into physical addresses. 
-  Determines the route from the source to the destination computer
-  Manages traffic problems, such as switching, routing, and  controlling the congestion of data packets.
-  **Your data is PACKETS**
-  PROTOCOLS: ICMP,ARP,NAT,IP

### Layer 2: Data Link Layer
-  Packages raw bits from the Physical layer into frames (logical, structured packets for data). **[ receiver ]**
-  Provides reliable transmission of frames
-  It waits for an acknowledgment from the receiving computer.
-  Retransmits frames for which acknowledgement not received
-  **Your data is FRAMES**
-  PROTOCOLS: PPP,NDP,CDP

### Layer 1: Physical Layer
-  Transmits bits from one computer to another
-  Regulates the transmission of a stream of bits over a physical medium.
-  Defines how the cable is attached to the network adapter and what 
-  Transmission technique is used to send data over the cable. Deals with issues  like
-  The definition of 0 and 1, e.g. how many volts represents a 1, and how long a bit lasts?
-  How many pins a connector has, and what the function of each pin is?
-  **Your data is Bits**
-  PROTOCOLS/DEVICES: RS-449

